First iteration of smart contract upgrade docs (#742)
digital-asset/docs.daml.com: docs/2.10.0/docs/upgrade/smart-contract-upgrades.rst

`What are Zero Downtime Smart Contract Upgrades <#what-are-zero-downtime-smart-contract-upgrades>`__.

In this beta version of SCU, the following functionality has not yet
been implemented, but may be implemented in future releases.

-  Retroactive interface instances are not compatible with SCU upgrades.

-  Daml Script does not support SCU, Daml Script Beta must be used.

-  The ``upgrades:`` field in the ``daml.yaml`` is not yet integrated into
   Multi-Package, and therefore will not be automatically built as a
   dependency (or when running ``daml build --all``, unless explicitly
   listed in ``multi-package.yaml``)

-  Contract keys in upgradable packages can only include types defined
   within the same package, or in ``daml-stdlib`` or ``daml-prim``, for hashing reasons.
   This restriction is intended to be loosened in a later version.

Local developer experience
==========================

Writing your first upgrade
--------------------------

Setup
~~~~~

We continue with the example introduced in `How Does It
Work <#how-does-it-work>`__. Begin by defining the first (old) version
of our package:

.. code:: bash

  > mkdir -p v1/my-pkg
  > cd v1/my-pkg

>   > daml init

Reviewer: Fixed in 016da500

Add ``daml-script-beta`` to the list of dependencies in ``v1/my-pkg/daml.yaml``,
as well as ``--target=1.16`` to the ``build-options``:

.. code:: yaml
  
  ...
  dependencies:
  - daml-prim
  - daml-stdlib
  - daml-script-beta
  build-options:
  - --target=1.16

Then create ``v1/my-pkg/daml/Main.daml``:

.. code:: daml

  module Main where

  import Daml.Script

  template IOU
    with
      issuer: Party
      owner: Party
      value: Int
    where
      signatory issuer
      observer owner
      key issuer : Party
      maintainer key

Running daml build should successfully produce a DAR in
``v1/my-pkg/.daml/dist/my-pkg-1.0.0.dar``:

.. code:: bash

  > daml build
  Running single package build of my-pkg as no multi-package.yaml was found.
  ...
  Compiling my-pkg to a DAR.
  ...
  Created .daml/dist/my-pkg-1.0.0.dar

Now we create the second (new) version of our package, which will
upgrade the first version. Navigate back to the root directory and copy
the v1 package into a v2 directory.

.. code:: bash

  > cd ../..
  > cp -r v1 v2
  > cd v2/my-pkg

Edit the ``daml.yaml`` to update the package version, and add the ``upgrades:``
field pointing to v1:

.. code:: yaml

>   version: 2.0.0

Author: We've used 2.0.0 in our tests, so it was mostly habit - I agree that a minor bump is better here, I'll update the doc.

  ...
  dependencies:
  - daml-prim
  - daml-stdlib
  - daml-script-beta
  upgrades: ../../v1/my-pkg/.daml/dist/my-pkg-1.0.0.dar
  build-options:
  - --target=1.16

Now any changes we make to v2 will be validated as a correct upgrade
over v1.

First Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Begin by adding a new ``currency`` field to ``v2/my-pkg/daml/Main.daml``:

.. code:: daml

  ...
  template IOU
    with
      issuer: Party
      owner: Party
      value: Int
      currency: Text -- New field
    where
  ...

Run ``daml build``, an error will be emitted:

.. code:: bash

  > daml build
  ...
  error type checking template Main.IOU :

>     The upgraded template IOU has added new fields, but those fields are not Optional.

Author: @dylant-da

>     The upgraded template IOU has added new fields, but those fields are not Optional.

Reviewer: In ticket https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/18312

script and place the resulting party for Alice into an output file
``alice-v1``:

.. code:: bash

  > cd v1/my-pkg
  > daml ledger upload-dar --port 6865
  > daml script \
      --ledger-host localhost --ledger-port 6865 \
      --dar .daml/dist/my-pkg-1.0.0.dar \
      --script-name Main:mkIOU \
      --output-file alice-v1 \
      --enable-contract-upgrading
  Slf4jLogger started
  Running CoordinatedShutdown with reason [ActorSystemTerminateReason]

.. note::
  All invocations of daml script using ZDT require the ``--enable-contract-upgrading`` flag.

From inside ``v2/my-pkg``, upload and run the ``getIOU`` script, passing in the
``alice-v1`` file as the script’s input:

.. code:: bash

  > cd ../../v2/my-pkg
  > daml ledger upload-dar --port 6865
  > daml script \
      --ledger-host localhost --ledger-port 6865 \
      --dar .daml/dist/my-pkg-2.0.0.dar \
      --script-name Main:getIOU \
      --output-file /dev/stdout \
      --input-file ../../v1/my-pkg/alice-v1 \
      --enable-contract-upgrading
  Slf4jLogger started
  {
    "_1": "...",
    "_2": {
    "issuer": "party-...",
    "owner": "party-...",
    "value": 1,
    "currency": null
    }
  }

>   Running CoordinatedShutdown with reason [ActorSystemTerminateReason]

Author: We'll likely replace everything that isn't significant to this document with `...` to ease this,

>   Running CoordinatedShutdown with reason [ActorSystemTerminateReason]

Reviewer: I've made a ticket for moving these code examples into source files with tests: https://github.com/digital-asset/docs.daml.com/issues/744

>   Running CoordinatedShutdown with reason [ActorSystemTerminateReason]

Author: I've now also removed some details from the examples, to keep this fresh for longer while we work on automated testing

replace the use of ``exerciseCmd`` with ``exerciseExactCmd`` in the body of
``doubleIOU`` in v1, and restart your sandbox.

.. code:: bash

  > # Replace exerciseCmd with exerciseExactCmd in v1
  > # Do it using your editor, or use `sed`
  > sed -i -E 's/exerciseCmd/exerciseExactCmd/g' \
      v1/my-pkg/daml/Main.daml

Once you’ve restarted your sandbox, create an IOU without a currency in
V2 via ``mkIOUWithoutCurrency``, then run ``doubleIOU`` on it from V1:

.. code:: bash

  > # Create a new v2 IOU contract, without USD as currency
  > cd v2/my-pkg
  > daml ledger upload-dar --port 6865
  > daml script \
      --ledger-host localhost --ledger-port 6865 \
      --dar .daml/dist/my-pkg-2.0.0.dar \
      --script-name Main:mkIOUWithoutCurrency \
      --output-file alice-v2
  > cd ../../v1/my-pkg
  > daml ledger upload-dar --port 6865
  > daml script \
  	--ledger-host localhost --ledger-port 6865 \
  	--dar .daml/dist/my-pkg-1.0.0.dar \
  	--script-name Main:doubleIOU \
  	--output-file /dev/stdout \
  	--input-file ../../v2/my-pkg/alice-v2 \
  	--enable-contract-upgrading
  ...
  	"issuer": "party-...",
  	"owner": "party-...",
  	"value": 2

>   ...

Author: Paul and I discussed this, we think a little section at the top of the local dev experience saying that it only covers a subset of the functionality, and the rest is in the "continuing section" would be helpful, or having this reading guide. However, given our time constraints, for now we have simply forward linked to where it is discussed. We can address this when Curtis looks through the docs in a separate PR.

mentioned upgrade-enabled options in daml.yaml to compile and generate
the related DAR. This can be uploaded using the existing gRPC endpoints
without modifications and will be immediately available for use.

.. note::

  In 2.9, once a DAR is successfully uploaded, it cannot be
  safely removed from the participant node. Participant operators must
  then ensure that uploaded functionality does not break the intended
  upgrade lineage as newly uploaded DARs affect the upgrading line (i.e.
  all subsequent uploads must be compatible with this one as well).

.. note::

  Upgrade-compatible packages stored on the participant must
  lead to unique (in both directions) package-id <-> (package-name,
  package-version) relationships since runtime package-name -> package-id
  resolution must be deterministic (see Ledger API section). For this
  reason, once a LF 1.16+ DAR has been uploaded with its main package
  having a specific package-name/package-version, this relationship cannot
  be overridden. Hence, uploading a DAR with different content for the
  same name/version as an existing DAR on the participant will lead to a

>   rejection with error code KNOWN_DAR_VERSION.

Reviewer 2: not quite sure I'm following. the package version is part of the content hash that cretes the packge id. Are you worried about hash collisions?

>   rejection with error code KNOWN_DAR_VERSION.

Reviewer 3: I was, given this text. 

Now, I'm no longer worried, as I see what you're saying here: https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/7137d35d5762c4c4d20aba98746abe5347375437/sdk/daml-lf/archive/src/main/protobuf/com/daml/daml_lf_dev/daml_lf2.proto#L1400-L1415

@samuel-williams-da : please only talk about the `(package-name, package-version) -> package-id` injection, as the other direction is given by construction, and is thus confusing.

>   rejection with error code KNOWN_DAR_VERSION.

Author: cc: @tudor-da

>   rejection with error code KNOWN_DAR_VERSION.

Reviewer 4: Made it clearer in 14db8aa380ac21ecf4bb02e862c0abb818b29b9d

       do
         let amt = fromOptional 3 amount
         create this with value = value * amt
  ...

Add a script called ``duplicateIOU`` in V1:

.. code:: daml

  ...
  duplicateIOU : Party -> Script (Optional (ContractId IOU, IOU))
  duplicateIOU key = do
    mbIOU <- getIOU key
    case mbIOU of
      None -> pure None
      Some (iouCid, _) -> do
        newCid <- key `submit` exerciseExactCmd iouCid Duplicate
        mbNewIOU <- queryContractId key newCid
        case mbNewIOU of
          Some newIOU -> pure (Some (newCid, newIOU))
          None -> pure None

A similar script called ``duplicateIOU`` should be added in V2, supplying an
``amount`` field:

.. code:: daml

  ...
  duplicateIOU : Party -> Script (Optional (ContractId IOU, IOU))
  duplicateIOU key = do
    mbIOU <- getIOU key
    case mbIOU of
      None -> pure None
      Some (iouCid, _) -> do
        newCid <- key `submit` exerciseExactCmd iouCid Duplicate { amount = Some 4 }
        mbNewIOU <- queryContractId key newCid
        case mbNewIOU of
          Some newIOU -> pure (Some (newCid, newIOU))
          None -> pure None

Running the v1 ``duplicateIOU`` script with ``exerciseExactCmd`` will always run

> the v1 implementation for the ``Duplicate`` choice, and similarly for v2.

Author: @paulbrauner-da will extend the example to also upgrade the result type.

> the v1 implementation for the ``Duplicate`` choice, and similarly for v2.

Author: Paul has extended this example to include result types. The example already showed upgrading choice arguments.

Modifying Signatory Definitions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Other definitions can be changed, but warnings are emitted to remind the
developer that the changes can be unsafe and need to be made with care
to preserve necessary invariants.

Signatories and observers are one expression that can be changed.
Importantly, the new definition must not change the resulting list of
signatories and observers for existing contracts.

For example, add a new field of “outside observers” to the v2 IOU
template, and add them to the observer definition.

.. code:: daml

  ...
      -- Add a new outsideObservers field
      outsideObservers: Optional [Party]
    where
      signatory issuer
      -- Add outsideObservers to the observer definition
      observer owner, fromOptional [] outsideObservers
  ...

The new observer definition will allow v2 contracts and beyond to add
new observers via the outsideObservers field. However, any existing
contracts will default to ``None`` for the ``outsideObservers`` field, so all
existing contracts will have the same observer list as before: the

> single owner.

Author: Added a small note, this is also elaborated on in best practices

  ...
      "issuer": "party-...",
      "owner": "party-...",
      "value": 1,
      "currency": "USD"
  ...

For downgrades from v2 to v1, only constructors that are defined in both
v1 and v2 can be downgraded from v2 to v1. Any constructor that doesn’t
exist in the v1 package will fail to downgrade with a runtime error. In
the case of our ``IOU``, any ``CHF`` will fail to downgrade, so any v2 contracts
with a ``CHF`` currency cannot be used in v1 workflows.

For example, create a contract with ``CHF`` as its ``currency`` field via v2’s
``mkIOU`` script. Attempting to query it via v1’s ``getIOU`` script will fail
with a lookup error for the CHF variant.

.. code:: bash

  > cd v2/my-pkg
  > daml script
      --ledger-host localhost --ledger-port 6865 \
      --dar .daml/dist/my-pkg-2.0.0.dar \
      --script-name Main:mkIOU \
      --output-file alice-v2 \
      --enable-contract-upgrading
  ...
  > cd ../../v1/my-pkg
  > daml script
      --ledger-host localhost --ledger-port 6865 \
      --dar .daml/dist/my-pkg-1.0.0.dar \
      --script-name Main:getIOU \
      --output-file /dev/stdout \
      --input-file ../../v2/my-pkg/alice-v2 \
      --enable-contract-upgrading
  ...

>   Failed to translate create argument: Lookup(NotFound(DataVariantConstructor(c1543a5c2b7ff03650162e68e03e469d1ecf9f546565d3809cdec2e0255ed902:Main:Currency,CHF),DataEnumConstructor(c1543a5c2b7ff03650162e68e03e469d1ecf9f546565d3809cdec2e0255ed902:Main:Currency,CHF)))

Reviewer: Error message improvements are on roadmap, this one especially applies to this issue -> https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/18312

Other error message improvement issues;
https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/17647
https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/19008
https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/19177

submission.

Daml Studio support
-------------------

Daml Studio runs a reference model of Canton called the IDE Ledger, this
ledger has been updated to support most of the functionality of upgrades
in daml-script. The behavior that this ledger does not implement is the
following:

-  Upgrades type checking
   The Upgrades type errors you get when running daml build are not
   currently shown as code intelligence in Daml Studio.

-  Contract ID verification
   This may allow some contract metadata changes to take effect that
   Canton otherwise would not.

-  Per-submission package preference
   Any submission to the IDE Ledger mimics a Canton participants
   default package preference of the most recent package version.

Testing
=======

Upgrade validity checking
-------------------------

While the compile time upgrade checks are quite thorough, they are not
yet a perfect mirror of the checks that a participant does when a
package is uploaded. We recommend that as a final check for the validity
of your upgraded package, you can either:

-  Run a Canton sandbox (running ``daml sandbox``) and upload your old and
   new packages (``daml ledger upload-dar``).

> -  Perform a dry-run upload of your package to a more permanent testing

Reviewer 3: @basvangijzel-DA @paulbrauner-da : note that there are often multiple packages that are used by a single app, and that need to be changed for an upgrade. See this example of an upgrade to the splice apps: https://github.com/DACH-NY/canton-network-node/commit/917a631b19a264f3a98957d9c9018e3ee9ae8d62

From what I see, the dry-run functionality does not support checking the validity in that case, as it only accepts a single argument. Is that correct?

Author: This is true, it would be possible to test all your packages together if you bundled them into one dar, but the UX wouldn't be great. We may want to reconsider this advice.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for confirming. I'll advise to use a fresh participant instead and uploading all packages there in the upgrading guidelines here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/10ttHyhufCI7hGEsd0CA2VCjsXPhAg7Hg-fVeMQOKS4U/edit#bookmark=id.j6ol6es6xln

Author: That said, if your several packages interact with eachother, they'd be dependencies, so the upgrade check would run. if you have several disconnected packages, then the upgrade checks don't need to know about them all. This might be fine, @dylant-da can you confirm?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, that might work. It still requires uploading all maximum packages in the dependency ordering; and that needs to be updated in case that hierarchy changes. I'd thus suggest to just strike this suggestion and advise for the one with the sandbox which will always work, and is very simple to use.

Reviewer 3: Also note that the one with a Canton sandbox comes with the caveat that it might use a different version of the upload checks than the one on the participant node that's actually used in production. So ideally we recomment starting a fresh instance of a participant node of the same version that's used in production; and hint at the sandbox as simple to use approximation to that.

Reviewer: Yes, if the packages are disconnected then the upgrade checks won't need to know about them all in unison.

Reviewer: This recommendation should make it clear that this function is only an alternative to the compiler checks, and then explain that for a multi-DAR workflow a full participant upload is recommended.

Something like:

> We recommend that as a further check for the validity
of your upgraded package, you perform a dry-run upload of your package to a testing environment, using the ``--dry-run`` flag of the ``daml ledger upload-dar`` command, which runs the upgrade type-checking, but does not persist your package to the ledger.

> For workflows involving multiple DARs, we recommend more robust testing by running a Canton sandbox with the same version and environment as your in-production participant and uploading all the old and new packages that constitute your Daml app.

Reviewer 3: @dylant-da : I was under the impression that the full upload is always required, as it does check more than what the compiler checks. Isn't that the case?

Author: Yeah I think we should always recommend doing an upload, but the dry-run flag should be useful for uploading to a test environment.
The upload checks do currently check more than the compiler checks, but a dry-run upload runs the same checks as without dry-run.

Reviewer: The word "alternative" was poorly chosen - I meant "extension" - the participant checks are more comprehensive than the compiler checks. The dry-run flag always runs the same checks as a full upload would create.

Author: I have updated the section with Dylan's suggestion. If we want further changes, lets put them in a different PR, I'd like to merge this PR today.

Reviewer 3: OK. Seems we're mostly aligned then. Let's see whether further changes are required once this PR is merged.

  > daml build
  ...
  error type checking data type Main.Shape:
    The upgraded variant constructor Polygon from variant Shape has added a field.
  ERROR: Creation of DAR file failed.

Making the new ``sideLen`` field optional fixes the error:

.. code:: daml

  ...
        , sideLen : Optional (Numeric 10) -- New field
  ...

.. code:: bash

  > cd v2/my-pkg
  > daml build
  ...
  Created .daml/dist/my-pkg-2.0.0.dar

Limitations in Upgrading Variants
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Upgrading variants has some limitations - because we have defined the
``Circle`` constructor without a field in curly braces, it cannot be
upgraded with new fields.

.. code:: daml

  ...
    -- Add a field where no fields existed
    = Circle { radius : Optional (Numeric 10) }
  ...

.. code:: bash

  > cd v2/my-pkg
  > daml build
  ...
  error type checking data type Main.Shape:
    The upgraded data type Shape has changed the type of a variant.
  ERROR: Creation of DAR file failed.

The same applies to variants with unnamed fields. If the v1 definition
of the ``Line`` constructor were as follows, it would also not be able to
upgrade:

.. code:: daml

  ...
    | Line (Numeric 10)

> In general, in order to enable future upgrades, it is strongly

Author: @paulbrauner-da your discussion from the doc:
Paul
isn't that something we could avoid by modifying the engine for 2.10?

Dylan
Yeah, the plan was to allow Unit to upgrade to anything
I'd rather drop this recommendation once that actually lands in 2.10 (or 2.9.1), however.

Sam
Oops missed this, lets leave it as a comment on the PR for discussion

Paul
That's fine, if I understand correctly this will change in 2.10 or 2.9.1, not now.

Author: I've made a ticket linking back to this in language team, so it isn't dropped
https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/19532

the following:

.. code:: typescript

  const MyTemplateWithPackageId = { 
    ...pkg.Mod.MyTemplate,
    templateId: `${pkg.packageId}:Mod:MyTemplate`,
  }

.. _json-api-server-1:

JSON API Server
----------------

As before, template IDs may still be used with a package id, however,
for packages built as LF 1.16 or greater, the package may also be
identified by name, i.e. for upgradable packages, a template ID can have
the form ``#<package-name>:<module-name>:<template-name>``, and this will be
resolved to corresponding templates from all packages which share this
name, and are built at 1.16 or above. For packages built at LF 1.15 or
lower, the templates will not be identifiable via a package name, and a
package id must be used.

Note: template ids in query results will always use a package id. This
allows us to distinguish the source of a particular contract. This means
that if you use a template with a package name in the request, you can
no longer expect the template ids in the result to exactly match the
input template id.

Package ID selection preference: preferences apply to JSON API where you
can specify your preferred selection of package versions.

PQS
---

> TODO: Update this depending on what happens with PQS.

Author: Note this TODO, which will depend on whether PQS re-allows direct package-id queries. Waiting on answer here - i believe @basvangijzel-DA is checking

Reviewer 5: @raphael-speyer-da as mentioned in Slack, would be good to have an answer here.

Reviewer 6: I'd have to defer to @filmackay on that one.

Reviewer 5: Here is Fil's answer:

We have flipped our Read API to name, not id. This is independent of Ledger API and focused on our use cases where users never want id - even in the <=1.15 target. To preserve id would have left an enormous amount of tech debt in implementing two incompatible systems and disrupt everything including the storage model. If you want id exactly as it was: users are welcome to use the old PQS version as we maintain a comparability matrix

Author: Note that this compatibility matrix is not public, for now I have not mentioned it.

ledger using package-name to view all versions of contracts, in an
integrated way.

Daml-Script-Beta
----------------

Daml 2.9 introduces a new version of Daml Script, which can be used by
depending on ``daml-script-beta`` in your ``daml.yaml``, as you will have seen
in `Writing your first upgrade <#writing-your-first-upgrade>`__. Only this version of Daml Script
supports upgrades over the ledger-api.

All commands and queries in this version of daml script will now use
upgrades/downgrades automatically, to ensure that the correct versions
of choices are exercises, and correct payloads are returned.

The following additional functionality is available for more advanced
uses of SCU.

**Exact commands**

Each of the 4 submission commands now have an “exact” variant, of the
forms ``createExactCmd``, ``exerciseExactCmd``, ``exerciseByKeyExactCmd`` and
``createAndExerciseExactCmd``. These commands will force the participant to
use the exact version of the package that your script uses, this is most
useful when you want to be absolutely certain of the choice code you are
calling. Note that exact and non-exact commands can be mixed in the same
submission.

**Package Preference**

> TODO: Decide whether or not to include this

Author: Need a verdict here, probably going to exclude it, could always add for 2.9.1

@basvangijzel-DA

Reviewer 5: I would exclude. Based on my recent conversations with @meiersi-da, using Daml Script for upgrade testing, particularly on the integration test level, is not considered high priority. Given that package preference is really more for integration testing I would just leave it out until we have support in the IDE ledger.

.. Copyright (c) 2024 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Zero Downtime Smart Contract Upgrades
#####################################

.. .. toctree::
   :hidden:

Theory of Operation
===================

What are Zero Downtime Smart Contract Upgrades?
-----------------------------------------------

> Zero-Downtime Smart Contract Upgrades (SCU) are a new feature for Daml

Reviewer 3: @hrischuk-da : I've just noticed that the SCU acronym is not yet present in our [Internal Glossary](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1npV7WUZh78I2SLLm-lbVvCsq7HWt5a-uqzZ7LeHhNJs/edit#bookmark=id.13s0zijoiyzs), can you add it please?

Reviewer 7: Good point.  I will sync up and make it happen

Reviewer 7: Done

     manipulating canton’s databases.
   | This is error prone and requires some downtime for the participant.

With SCU, any contract from the old package is automatically interpreted
as the new version as soon as it is used in a new workflow that requires
it.

In this way, package authors can publish new package versions that
automatically improve contracts’ functionality without requiring any
error prone migrations, without downtime, without requiring any
additional network traffic, and without any extensive communication with
downstream users.

Requirements
------------

Note that SCU is only available when the criteria below is met:

-  Canton 2.9.x or above

-  Daml LF Version 1.16 or above

-  Canton Protocol Version 6 or above

There are instructions below on how to configure this setup. The
sections below, unless explicitly stated otherwise, assume that this is
the case.

How Does it Work
----------------

When upgrading a package, the package author modifies their existing
package to add new functionality, such as new fields and choices. When
the new package is uploaded to a participant with the old version, the

> participant ensures that it can automatically upgrade every change

Author: I've reworded this section, please let me know what you think

> participant ensures that it can automatically upgrade every change

Reviewer 3: "automatically upgrade every change" -- it's not "changes" that are upgraded is it? It is that "every changed contract is upgradeable" or "all changes between old and new version are backwards-compatible".

I'd suggest that you lean more on the notion of backwards-compatible changes, instead of "upgradeable changes".

> participant ensures that it can automatically upgrade every change

Author: I think github hasn't shown you the reworded version, it's now

```
When
the new package is uploaded to a participant with the old version, 
the participant ensures that the every modification to the model in the
new version is a valid upgrade of the previous version.
```
I can reword the last bit to `in the new version is backwards-compatible with the previous version`, but I do like the phrasing of upgrade validity here, as it leads into the upgrade validity checks nicely.

between the old and new version before adding it to the package set.

In order to be able to automatically upgrade a contract or datatype, SCU
restricts the kinds of changes that a new package version can introduce
over its prior version.

For example, the simplest kind of data transformation that SCU supports
is adding a field to a template.

Given the following first version of a template:

.. code:: daml

  template IOU
    with
      issuer: Party
      owner: Party
      value: Int
    where
      signatory issuer
      observer owner

> We can add a new field for currency:

Author: I've reworded across the examples in the doc.

.. code:: daml

  template IOU
    with
      issuer: Party
      owner: Party
      value: Int
      -- New field:
      currency: Optional String
    where
      signatory issuer
      observer owner

With SCU, any new template fields must be optional - templates from the
old version are automatically upgraded to new versions by setting the
new field to ``None``. This optional field requirement extends to all

> records in your package. Conversely, newer contracts with this field set

Author: All records, this is techniccally a limitation, I will add it to the limitations section, we can fix it for a later version.

to ``None`` can be automatically downgraded to previous versions of the
template in workflows that have not yet been updated.

Automatic Data Upgrades
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When extending data in a daml model, SCU requires the old model be
representable in the new model. I.e., for extending a record, we can
only add nullable (``Optional``) fields, so that old data can be represented
by setting these fields to ``None``. This mentality is continued for
Variants and Enums, which only allow adding constructors, with some
other restrictions covered in `Continuing to Write Your Upgrades <#continuing-to-write-your-upgrades>`__. This
approach is inspired by
`Protobuf <https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/proto3/#updating>`__
and Typescript's ability to ignore `excess
fields <https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/objects.html#excess-property-checks>`__
via ``as``.

> Following is a list of places where automatic data upgrades occur:

Reviewer 3: Below you also refer to downgrades, but they are not explained at this point. Consider explaining them together with the upgrades

Author: It is already briefly explained at the end of the above "How does it work" section, do you think we need more than that?

Reviewer 3: so are upgrades ;-) 

So why not talk about "Automatic Data Upgrades and Downgrades" and treat them equally?

**Submissions to the ledger-api**

When you submit a command, and do not explicitly specify a package-id to
use, canton will automatically upgrade the payloads you give to the most
recent version of the package that is uploaded on the participant. It
will also use the most recent implementation of any choices you exercise
directly through the ledger-api. This behavior can be influenced by
package preference, which will be covered later.

**Fetches/Creates**

Within choices, the package-ids of the payloads we expect for fetches
and creates are given by the version of the package we depend on. SCU
will upgrade (or downgrade) the payloads given/stored in the ledger to

> match these versions when used in a choice body.

Reviewer 3: Technical question: can there be a downgrade happening on a `create`?

Author: Yes, if the package-preference on the participant/submission chooses the previous version.
This would also happen if V2 was unvetted.

Reviewer 4: > This would also happen if V2 was unvetted.

**Note:** Vetting does not affect the participant package-preference in 2.9 and there's no plan support this at all for 2.x. In 2.9, the general recommendation should be to not rely on the vetting state but, where needed, explicitly select the desired package-id to be used

Author: Oh! Okay is this noted in the docs already?

Reviewer 3: > Note: Vetting does not affect the participant package-preference in 2.9 and there's no plan support this at all for 2.x. In 2.9, the general recommendation should be to not rely on the vetting state but, where needed, explicitly select the desired package-id to be used

@basvangijzel-DA @tudor-da : this requires adapting the [upgrading guidelines here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10ttHyhufCI7hGEsd0CA2VCjsXPhAg7Hg-fVeMQOKS4U/edit?disco=AAABQ23TQm8), let's figure it out together there.

Reviewer 8: > Yes, if the package-preference on the participant/submission chooses the previous version.

This could happen only for ledger API command.

Author: @tudor-da can you please confirm if this needs to be written in limitations?

Author: I've added a note for this in the limitations section. I'm going to leave this comment unresolved so Bas see's the note about the upgrading guidelines.

Author: After discussion, we're removing this section as unvetting is not recommended in 2.x, nor is uploading without vetting.
Given the state of vetting in 2.x, any recommendation we give will be met with more issues.

Reviewer 5: Agreed. Simon already wrote up his notes here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/10ttHyhufCI7hGEsd0CA2VCjsXPhAg7Hg-fVeMQOKS4U/edit#bookmark=id.h6kczypfi7qv

**Exercises**

Similarly to fetches, the version of the choice implementation that is
called from a choice body is determined by the package that the choice’s
package depends on. SCU will automatically upgrade/downgrade the payload

> stored in the ledger to match that of the choice it is calling.

Reviewer 3: Missing: result types

Reviewer 5: Note that the engine does not upgrade/downgrade the result types, it will normally be the clients that do the conversion (same logic as the engine).

Author: I've reworded this section to forward mention that result types are handled by consuming clients, and to explicitly mention it in consuming clients.

responsibility of these clients to upgrade/downgrade the payloads they
receive to match what is expected downstream. Daml-script, as well as
ts/java codegen, will do this for you to match the payload to the
package versions they were run/built from.

Upgrading Across the Stack
--------------------------

These are all the components that interact with upgrades as a feature,
and this is how you as a user should be aware it interacts.

Canton
~~~~~~

When considering the Canton ledger nodes, only the Canton participant
node is aware of smart contract upgrading. The Canton domain nodes are
only concerned with the protocol version which must be minimally 6 for
allowing connected participants to use upgradable Daml packages.

Below, we provide a brief overview of the interactions with the
participant node that have been adapted for supporting the smart
contract upgrading feature starting with Canton 2.9:

-  DAR upload requests go through an additional validation stage to
   check the contained new packages for upgrade-compatibility with
   other packages previously uploaded on the participant.

-  Ledger API command submissions can be automatically or explicitly

>    up/downgraded if multiple upgrade-compatible packages exist.

Reviewer 3: Why do they need to be upgrade-compatible? Isn't it that just the package-name must match the one used in the submission? And that submissions with package-names instead of package-ids can be used?

Author: cc: @tudor-da

Reviewer 4: I was referring here to >= LF 1.16 packages as LF 1.15 packages do not partake in the package-name resolution:
- [ ] Make it clear that `upgrade-compatible` here refers to LF 1.16 vs LF 1.15 packages

Author: Are you going to make this change to the docs?

Reviewer 4: Addressed in 14db8aa380ac21ecf4bb02e862c0abb818b29b9d

-  Ledger API streaming queries are adapted to support fetching events
   more generically, by package-name.

Code Generation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Java and TypeScript CodeGen have been updated to perform upgrades on
retrieved contracts, and will now use package-names over package-ids for
commands to the participant.

JSON API Server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To match the changes to the Ledger-Api, the JSON API similarly supports
package-name queries and command submission.

PQS & Daml Shell
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

PQS now only supports querying contracts via package-name, see
`Limitations <#limitations>` for package-id queries.

Daml Shell builds on top of PQS, so inherits this behavior.

Daml Script
~~~~~~~~~~~

We’ve added a new opt-in version of daml-script which, among other
improvements, adds support for Upgrades.

This new version acts as a drop in replacement for the previous
daml-script, and will enable support for upgrades on all queries and
command submissions.

We also expose new functions for more advanced interactions with

> upgrades, as well as to revert to previous submission behavior.

Reviewer 3: This almost reads like release notes. It doesn't really help a user to understand how to use the feature for their benefit, which is what I expected to get in these docs here. 

Consider splitting the docs into a user documentation for a new user, and a piece that documents what changed compared to Daml 2.8.x and lower.

Author: We've discussed this in a call. In the interest of not blocking, we're going to move forward with this as is.
@hrischuk-da If you would like to move this section over to release notes, feel free to do so and we'll shorten this, but this can happen later.

Author: cc: @basvangijzel-DA

Reviewer 3: OK

Daml Compiler
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Daml compiler supports the new ``upgrades:`` configuration field - every
time ``daml build`` is invoked, it will validate the current package for
upgrade compatibility against the package specified in the ``upgrades:``
field.

Validation emits custom error messages for common upgrading mistakes,
and warns the package author when upgrading a package in a potentially
unsafe way. Note however that this validation cannot be complete, as
upgrade validity depends on a participant’s package store. The
participant’s DAR upload checks have the final say on upgrade validity.

Daml Studio
~~~~~~~~~~~

Basic Upgrades support has also been added to Daml Studio’s “Script
Results” tab, allowing you to test your upgrades quickly and easily
within VSCode. There are some limitations here which are listed in 

> `Daml Studio support <#daml-studio-support>` below.

Author: We haven't yet spent much time on tools for testing upgrades, so full integration tests (like the one you linked, and as explained in the testing section) and daml-script is the best we have. I've added a note to the testing section essentially saying that `daml-script` is for small tests of your daml model, but that workflow tests are more important.

Limitations
-----------

In order to enable zero downtime upgrades, alongside multi-versioned
packages running concurrently, we’ve limited the types of
transformations that can be performed on live data. Following are some
data transformations that cannot be made using SCU upgrades.

-  Renaming, removal or rearrangement of fields in a template

-  Conversion of records to variants, and vice versa

-  Moving templates/datatypes to other modules

-  Upgrading interface and exception definitions

These restrictions are required to give a simple model of runtime
upgrades, avoiding ambiguity and non-obvious side effects. If you
require any of these types of changes, you may need to consider a
redeployment with downtime, using any of the tools listed in 
`What are Zero Downtime Smart Contract Upgrades <#what-are-zero-downtime-smart-contract-upgrades>`__.

In this beta version of SCU, the following functionality has not yet

> been implemented, but may be implemented in future releases.

Author: I'm confirming this now. If it is, would we simply add `(Beta)` to the end of the title? or is more needed?
Given these docs are written in the 2.10 section, and upgrades will be GA in 2.10, is it even right to label it beta here?

> been implemented, but may be implemented in future releases.

Reviewer 5: I would say put Beta in the title, and before releasing 2.10 we change the title to remove the (Beta).

  > daml build
  ...
  Created .daml/dist/my-pkg-2.0.0.dar

Limitations in Upgrading Variants
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Upgrading variants has some limitations - because we have defined the
``Circle`` constructor without a field in curly braces, it cannot be
upgraded with new fields.

.. code:: daml

  ...
    -- Add a field where no fields existed
    = Circle { radius : Optional (Numeric 10) }
  ...

.. code:: bash

  > cd v2/my-pkg
  > daml build
  ...
  error type checking data type Main.Shape:
    The upgraded data type Shape has changed the type of a variant.
  ERROR: Creation of DAR file failed.

The same applies to variants with unnamed fields. If the v1 definition
of the ``Line`` constructor were as follows, it would also not be able to
upgrade:

.. code:: daml

  ...
    | Line (Numeric 10)

In general, in order to enable future upgrades, it is strongly
recommended that all constructors use named fields, and that all
constructors have at least one field. If a constructor has no fields in
an initial v1 package, one can assign a dummy field.

For example, the correct way to write the v1 ``Circle`` constructor would be
as follows:

.. code:: daml

  ...

>     = Circle { dummy : () }

Author: @dylant-da

>     = Circle { dummy : () }

Reviewer: The compiler doesn't add a default dummy field for variants - it instead pretends you set the variant's inner type to Unit, i.e. writing `= Circle` and `= Circle ()` are identical in terms of what the engine eventually processes.

We planned to allow Unit to be upgradeable to anything, but deferred it due to time constraints and because it is a reverse-compatible change so we can implement it in 2.10 without breaking anything in 2.9.

>     = Circle { dummy : () }

Author: Do we consider this an explicit limitation, or simply an additional feature that isn't in 2.9

>     = Circle { dummy : () }

Reviewer: It is a limitation, but not one that should go into notes - it is already clarified as a limitation in the section on variant upgrades.

>     = Circle { dummy : () }

Author: Right, cheers

.. code:: daml

  ...
    = Circle { dummy : (), radius : Optional (Numeric 10) }
  ...

Nested Datatypes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If a data type, choice, or template has a field which refers to another
data type, the larger data type will be upgradeable if the field’s data
type is upgradeable as well.

For example, given the data type ``A`` with a field referring to data type
``B``,

.. code:: daml

  data A = A { b : B }
  data B = B { field : Text }

If modifications made to ``B`` are valid for SCU, then ``A`` will also be valid.

Dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Package authors may upgrade the dependencies of a package as well as the
package itself. A new version of a package may add new dependencies, and
must have all the dependencies of the old version. Dependencies of the

> old version may be upgraded, or must be identical.

Author: I had some trouble getting the right wording here, let me know what you think.

Package authors may upgrade the dependencies of a package as well as the
package itself. A new version of a package may add new dependencies, and

> must have all the dependencies of the old version. Dependencies of the

Author: We'll add a note about this

> must have all the dependencies of the old version. Dependencies of the

Author: We ideally want to avoid details of utility packages in the main doc, as for most people, they're simply an implementation detail of how we made stdlib work. Instead, I've simply linked to their definition in the reference.

from the start, such that subsequent versions of your package with
templates all depend on the same version of the package with
interfaces/exceptions. The SCU type checker will warn about this, but
you should see this warning as an error - it is very strongly
recommended that you do not compile interfaces and templates for
upgrades.

Remove retroactive instances
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

SCU replaces the need for retroactive instances, and is also not
compatible with them. To ensure package selection for interface choices
acts correctly, retroactive interface instances should be moved to newer
versions of templates, such that changes to the instance warrants a new
version of the template.

Explicit template versions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

While in many cases, the absence of new fields can be used to infer the
version of a package, it is recommended that you tag your contracts in
their payload with an explicit version field, and rely on that to know a
payload’s version. This will allow for less fragile behavior in the
event of “partial upgrades” (where a user may only upgrade part of the
payload of a package, intentionally), and allow you to model rollbacks

> as upgrades in a principled manner.

Author: I'm waiting on @basvangijzel-DA as to whether we keep this section. If so, I'll reword.

> as upgrades in a principled manner.

Reviewer 5: See comment above:
"I am not against mentioning that you can use versioning of a template to check behaviour. I don't think we should be recommending explicit tagging as a default though." I would be fine to phrase it somethinglike:

If you need package version specific behavior that cannot just depend on the presence or absence of new fields, then one workaround would be to tag your contracts in their payload with an explicit version field. This allows for less fragile behavior in the event of “partial upgrades” (where a user may only upgrade part of the payload of a package, intentionally), and allows you to model rollbacks as upgrades in a principled manner.

> as upgrades in a principled manner.

Author: I like your rewrite Bas, I've used it in place of the current section

payload’s version. This will allow for less fragile behavior in the
event of “partial upgrades” (where a user may only upgrade part of the
payload of a package, intentionally), and allow you to model rollbacks

> as upgrades in a principled manner.

Reviewer 5: I am not against mentioning that you can use versioning of a template to check behaviour. I don't think we should be recommending explicit tagging as a default though.

> as upgrades in a principled manner.

Author: I've rewritten this to be more of a workaround, than a default recommendation

Canton Protocol Version 6. This means that existing deployed contracts
will first require migration and redeployment to utilize this feature.

First, you’ll need to migrate your daml model to be compatible with
upgrades, see the section above about `Best Practices <#best-practices>`__ for what to
change here. Pay particular attention to the case on interfaces and
exceptions, and failure to do so could lead to packages which are
incompatible with SCU, and require the use of a separate tool (and
downtime).

Next, you’ll need to be aware of the new package-name scoping rules, and
ensure that your package set does not violate this. In short, packages
with the same package-name are considered to be “in the same scope”,
each version string within this scope can only be held by one package,
and contract key queries will yield contracts from all packages within
the same scope. If you have packages with the same name that you do not
want to be associated with each other via upgrades, you’ll need to
rename them. Note that this scoping rule *only* applies to packages in
LF1.16. Packages with the same name and version can exist in LF1.15, if

> you intend to use both LF versions at the same time on your participant.

Author: I've reworded to give direct advice/instructions, and pulled the other points out into single sentences.

protocol version together, since 2.9 introduces a new protocol version.
The steps to achieve this are given in the :ref:`Canton Upgrading
manual <one_step_migration>`.

Finally, you can migrate your live data from your previous dars to the
new LF1.16 dars, using one of the existing downtime upgrade techniques
listed in `What are Zero Downtime Smart Contract Upgrades <#what-are-zero-downtime-smart-contract-upgrades>`__.

The Upgrade Model in Depth - Reference
--------------------------------------

You can find the in-depth upgrading model, which can be used as a reference
for valid upgrades, :ref:`here <upgrade_model_reference>`.

Components
==========

Ledger API
----------

Until the introduction of SCU, templates in requests on the Ledger API
could only be referenced by the template-id, with the template fully
qualified name of format ``<package-id>:<module-name>:<template-name>``.

With SCU, we introduce a more generic template reference of the format
``#<package-name>:<module-name>:<template-name>``. This format is only a
Ledger API concept and is meant to suggest to the Ledger API to perform
a dynamic runtime resolution of packages in the Daml engine when

> generating the Daml transaction after command interpretation. This

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
generating the Daml transaction before command interpretation. This
```
The resolution needs to happen before command interpretation, as otherwise it's not clear what code to run.

Author: @tudor-da

Reviewer 4: I see now that it reads confusing 👍

   create command :ref:`here <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.CreateCommand>`)

-  For command submissions leading to Daml transactions that contain
   actions exercised on interfaces. In this situation there may be
   many versions of a template that implement the interface being
   exercised.

In these situations the following rules are followed to resolve the
package-name to a package-id:

-  By default, the participant resolves a package-name to the package-id
   pertaining to the highest package version uploaded

-  The command submitter can override the above-mentioned default
   participant resolution by pinning package-ids in the Command’s
   :ref:`package_id_selection_preference <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.Commands.package_id_selection_preference>`.
   More specifically, this field is a list of package-ids that must
   be explicitly used when resolving package-name *ambiguities* in
   either command template-id or interface resolution.

   -  **Note:** The Command’s
      :ref:`package_id_selection_preference <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.Commands.package_id_selection_preference>`
      must not lead to ambiguous resolutions for package-names,

>       meaning that it must not contain two package-ids pertaining to
>       the same package-name otherwise the submission will fail with

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      meaning that it must not contain two package-ids pertaining to
      the same package-name otherwise the submission will fail with
```
```suggestion
      meaning that it must not contain two package-ids pointing to
      packages with the same package-name, as otherwise the submission will fail with
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When subscribing for
:ref:`transaction <transaction-trees>`
or :ref:`active contract streams <active-contract-service>`,
users can now use the ``#<package-name>`` selector in the template-id format
to specify that they’re interested in fetching events for all templates
pertaining to the specified package-name. This template selection set is
dynamic and it widens with each uploaded template/package.

**Note:** The by-package-name query mechanism described here does not
apply to events sourced from non-upgradable templates (coming from
packages with LF < 1.16)

Example
^^^^^^^

Given the following packages with LF 1.16 existing on the participant
node:

-  Package AppV1

   -  package-name: ``app1``

   -  package-version: ``1.0.0``

   -  template-ids: ``pkgId1:mod:T``

-  Package AppV2

   -  package-name: ``app1``

   -  package-version: ``2.0.0``

   -  template-ids: ``pkgId2:mod:T``

If a transaction query is created with a templateId specified as
``#app1:mod:T``, then the events stream will include events from both
template-ids: ``pkgId1:mod:T`` and ``pkgId2:mod:T``

Codegen
-------

> For packages that support SCU (i.e. LF1.16), generated code will use
> package-names in place of package-ids in template ids. Retrieved data
> from the ledger will be subject to the upgrade transformations described
> in previous sections.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
For packages that support SCU (i.e. LF1.16), generated code uses
package-names in place of package-ids in template IDs. Retrieved data
from the ledger is subject to the upgrade transformations described
in previous sections.
```

Concretely, this is implemented as follows:

Java
~~~~

> The classes that are generated for each template and interface contain a
> ``TEMPLATE_ID`` field, which, for upgradable packages, will now use a
> package name, rather than a package id. In order to allow determining
> the package id of these packages, we add a new ``PACKAGE_ID`` field to all
> such classes. Upgradable packages will also cause ``PACKAGE_NAME`` and
> ``PACKAGE_VERSION`` fields to be present.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
The classes that are generated for each template and interface contain a
``TEMPLATE_ID`` field, which, for upgradable packages, now use a
package name rather than a package ID. To help you determine
the package ID of these packages, we have added a new ``PACKAGE_ID`` field to all
such classes. Upgradable packages also cause ``PACKAGE_NAME`` and
``PACKAGE_VERSION`` fields to be present.
```

TypeScript
~~~~~~~~~~

The ``templateId`` field on generated template classes has been updated to
use the package-name as the package qualifier for upgrade compatible

> packages. This will be used for command submission and queries, however
> note that the package qualifier given back in queries will contain the
> package-id, rather than package-name. Generated modules will now also
> give the package “reference”, which will be the package-name for upgrade
> compatible packages, otherwise it’ll be the package-id.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
packages. This is used for command submission and queries. However,
note that the package qualifier given back in queries contains the
package-id, rather than the package-name. Generated modules now also
give the package “reference”, which is the package-name for upgrade-compatible packages; for other packages it is the package-id.
```

To perform package-id qualified commands/queries in an upgrade
compatible package, a copy of the template object can be created using
the following:

.. code:: typescript

  const MyTemplateWithPackageId = { 
    ...pkg.Mod.MyTemplate,
    templateId: `${pkg.packageId}:Mod:MyTemplate`,
  }

.. _json-api-server-1:

JSON API Server
----------------

> As before, template IDs may still be used with a package id, however,

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Template IDs may still be used with a package ID, however,
```

for packages built as LF 1.16 or greater, the package may also be

> identified by name, i.e. for upgradable packages, a template ID can have
> the form ``#<package-name>:<module-name>:<template-name>``, and this will be
> resolved to corresponding templates from all packages which share this
> name, and are built at 1.16 or above. For packages built at LF 1.15 or

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
identified by name. That is to say, for upgradable packages a template ID can have
the form ``#<package-name>:<module-name>:<template-name>``, and this is
resolved to corresponding templates from all packages which share this
name, and are built at 1.16 or above. For packages built at LF 1.15 or
```

> lower, the templates will not be identifiable via a package name, and a
> package id must be used.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
lower, the templates are not identifiable via a package name, and a
package ID must be used.
```

> Note: template ids in query results will always use a package id. This

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Note: template IDs in query results always use a package ID. This
```

allows us to distinguish the source of a particular contract. This means
that if you use a template with a package name in the request, you can

> no longer expect the template ids in the result to exactly match the
> input template id.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
no longer expect the template IDs in the result to exactly match the
input template ID.
```

is not required for PQS, as PQS has dropped direct package-id queries.
Queries for package-names will return all versions of a given contract, alongside the
package-version and package-id for each contract.

.. note::
  If you still need to perform a query with an explicit package-id, you can either use
  a previous version of PQS, or add the following filter predicate to your query:
  ``SELECT \* FROM active('my_package:My.App:MyTemplate') WHERE package_id = 'my_package_id'``

Given that PQS uses a document-oriented model for ledger content
(JSONB), extensions to contract payloads are handled simply by returning
the additional data in the blob.

Daml Shell
----------

Daml Shell builds on PQS by providing a shell interface to inspect the
ledger using package-name to view all versions of contracts, in an
integrated way.

Daml-Script-Beta
----------------

Daml 2.9 introduces a new version of Daml Script, which can be used by
depending on ``daml-script-beta`` in your ``daml.yaml``, as you will have seen
in `Writing your first upgrade <#writing-your-first-upgrade>`__. Only this version of Daml Script
supports upgrades over the Ledger API.

> All commands and queries in this version of daml script will now use

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
All commands and queries in this version of Daml Script now use
```

upgrades/downgrades automatically, to ensure that the correct versions
of choices are exercises, and correct payloads are returned.

The following additional functionality is available for more advanced
uses of SCU.

**Exact commands**

> Each of the 4 submission commands now have an “exact” variant, of the

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Each of the four submission commands now has an “exact” variant, of the
```

forms ``createExactCmd``, ``exerciseExactCmd``, ``exerciseByKeyExactCmd`` and

> ``createAndExerciseExactCmd``. These commands will force the participant to

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
``createAndExerciseExactCmd``. These commands force the participant to
```

use the exact version of the package that your script uses, this is most
useful when you want to be absolutely certain of the choice code you are
calling. Note that exact and non-exact commands can be mixed in the same
submission.

Daml Studio support
-------------------

Daml Studio runs a reference model of Canton called the IDE Ledger, this
ledger has been updated to support most of the functionality of upgrades
in daml-script. The behavior that this ledger does not implement is the
following:

-  Upgrades type checking

>    The Upgrades type errors you’ll get when running daml build are not

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
   The Upgrades type errors you get when running daml build are not
```

   currently shown as code intelligence in Daml Studio.

-  Contract ID verification
   This may allow some contract metadata changes to take effect that
   Canton otherwise would not.

-  Per-submission package preference

>    Any submission to the IDE Ledger will mimic a Canton participants

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
   Any submission to the IDE Ledger mimics a Canton participants
```

   default package preference of the most recent package version.

Testing
=======

Upgrade validity checking
-------------------------

While the compile time upgrade checks are quite thorough, they are not
yet a perfect mirror of the checks that a participant does when a
package is uploaded. We recommend that as a final check for the validity
of your upgraded package, you can either:

-  Run a Canton sandbox (running ``daml sandbox``) and upload your old and

>    new package (``daml ledger upload-dar``).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   new packages (``daml ledger upload-dar``).
```
There can be multiple packages. See an upgrade of CN here: https://github.com/DACH-NY/canton-network-node/commit/917a631b19a264f3a98957d9c9018e3ee9ae8d62#diff-d2555057df0d1d7e4b946dee2ceeabeac77c2d51c94f0912e02c6b119bd7ad12

-  Run a dry-run upload of your package to a more permanent testing
   environment, using the ``--dry-run`` flag of the

>    ``daml ledger upload-dar`` command, which will run the upgrade
>    type-checking, but not persist your package to the ledger.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
   ``daml ledger upload-dar`` command, which runs the upgrade
   type-checking, but does not persist your package to the ledger.
```

Workflow testing
----------------

> While the testing of your workflows will be very application specific, we still

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
While testing your workflows is application-specific, we still
```

over its prior version.

For example, the simplest kind of data transformation that SCU supports
is adding a field to a template.

Given the following first version of a template:

.. code:: daml

  template IOU
    with
      issuer: Party
      owner: Party
      value: Int
    where
      signatory issuer
      observer owner

We can add a new field for currency:

.. code:: daml

  template IOU
    with
      issuer: Party
      owner: Party
      value: Int
      -- New field:
      currency: Optional String
    where
      signatory issuer
      observer owner

With SCU, any new template fields must be optional - templates from the
old version are automatically upgraded to new versions by setting the
new field to ``None``. This optional field requirement extends to all
records in your package. Conversely, newer contracts with this field set
to ``None`` can be automatically downgraded to previous versions of the
template in workflows that have not yet been updated.

Automatic Data Upgrades and Downgrades
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When extending data in a Daml model, SCU requires the old model to be
representable in the new model. For extending a record, we can

> only add nullable (``Optional``) fields, so that old data can be represented

Author: `nullable` here was to use language users are familiar with, i.e java, js, then remind them that the equivalent in daml is `Optional`

fields <https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/objects.html#excess-property-checks>`__
via ``as``.

Automatic data upgrades occur in the following places:

**Submissions to the Ledger API**

When you submit a command, and do not explicitly specify a package-id to
use, Canton will automatically upgrade (or downgrade) the payloads you give to the most
recent version of the package that is uploaded on the participant. It
will also use the most recent implementation of any choices you exercise
directly through the Ledger API. This behavior can be influenced by
`package preference <#dynamic-package-resolution-in-ledger-api-queries>`__.

**Fetches/Creates**

Within choices, the package-ids of the payloads we expect for fetches
and creates are given by the version of the package we depend on. SCU upgrades (or downgrades) the payloads given/stored in the ledger to
match these versions when used in a choice body.

**Exercises**

Similarly to fetches, the version of the choice implementation that is
called from a choice body is determined by the package that the choice’s
package depends on. SCU automatically upgrades (or downgrades) the payload

> stored in the ledger to match that of the choice it is calling.

Author: I've reworded this by merging the two sections into an "Updates in a choice body" section, and moving the details about ledger api to the point above.
Let me know what you think

-  Conversion of records to variants and vice versa

-  Moving templates/datatypes to other modules

-  Upgrading interface and exception definitions

These restrictions are required to give a simple model of runtime
upgrades, avoiding ambiguity and non-obvious side effects. If you
require any of these types of changes, you may need to consider a
redeployment with downtime, using any of the tools listed in 
`What are Zero Downtime Smart Contract Upgrades <#what-are-zero-downtime-smart-contract-upgrades>`__.

In this beta version of SCU, the following functionality has not yet
been implemented, but may be implemented in future releases.

-  Retroactive interface instances are not compatible with SCU upgrades.

-  Daml Script does not support SCU, you must use Daml Script Beta.

-  The ``upgrades:`` field in the ``daml.yaml`` is not yet integrated into
   Multi-Package, and therefore is not automatically built as a
   dependency (or when running ``daml build --all``, unless explicitly
   listed in ``multi-package.yaml``)

-  Contract keys in upgradable packages can only include types defined
   within the same package, or in ``daml-stdlib`` or ``daml-prim``, for hashing reasons.

>    This restriction is intended to be loosened in a later version.

Author: I've removed the note, but this does seem quite limiting, when was this agreed?

>    This restriction is intended to be loosened in a later version.

Reviewer 8: This will be loosed only in 3.1

>    This restriction is intended to be loosened in a later version.

Author: Ouch

>    This restriction is intended to be loosened in a later version.

Reviewer 8: The only solution to circumvention this limitation is to make the key fully upgradable. 
To make the key upgradable we need to create a new hashing scheme. 
Changing the hashing scheme in the future, will break data continuity except if we implement in the indexer a very complicate mechanism to transparently reindex the keys when upgrading Canton.

Now we create the second (new) version of our package, which
upgrades the first version. Navigate back to the root directory and copy
the v1 package into a v2 directory.

.. code:: bash

  > cd ../..
  > cp -r v1 v2
  > cd v2/my-pkg

Edit the ``daml.yaml`` to update the package version, and add the ``upgrades:``
field pointing to v1:

.. code:: yaml

  version: 1.1.0
  ...
  dependencies:
  - daml-prim
  - daml-stdlib
  - daml-script-beta
  upgrades: ../../v1/my-pkg/.daml/dist/my-pkg-1.0.0.dar
  build-options:
  - --target=1.16

Any changes we make to v2 are now validated as correct upgrades
over v1.

First Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Begin by adding a new ``currency`` field to ``v2/my-pkg/daml/Main.daml``:

.. code:: daml

  ...
  template IOU
    with
      issuer: Party
      owner: Party
      value: Int
      currency: Text -- New field
    where
  ...

Run ``daml build``. An error is emitted:

.. code:: bash

  > daml build
  ...
  error type checking template Main.IOU :
    The upgraded template IOU has added new fields, but those fields are not Optional.
  ERROR: Creation of DAR file failed.

Any new fields we add to a template must be optional - old contracts

> from the previous version are automatically upgraded by setting new

Author: I think I prefer automatically here

        mbNewIOU <- queryContractId key newCid
        case mbNewIOU of
          Some newIOU -> pure (Some (newCid, newIOU))
          None -> pure None

A similar script called ``duplicateIOU`` should be added in V2, supplying an
``amount`` field:

.. code:: daml

  ...
  duplicateIOU : Party -> Script (Optional (ContractId IOU, IOU))
  duplicateIOU key = do
    mbIOU <- getIOU key
    case mbIOU of
      None -> pure None
      Some (iouCid, _) -> do
        newCid <- key `submit` exerciseExactCmd iouCid Duplicate { amount = Some 4 }
        mbNewIOU <- queryContractId key newCid
        case mbNewIOU of
          Some newIOU -> pure (Some (newCid, newIOU))
          None -> pure None

Running the v1 ``duplicateIOU`` script with ``exerciseExactCmd`` always runs
the v1 implementation for the ``Duplicate`` choice, and likewise for v2.

Modifying Signatory Definitions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Other definitions can be changed, but warnings are emitted to remind the
developer that the changes can be unsafe and need to be made with care
to preserve necessary invariants.

Signatories and observers are one expression that can be changed.

> Importantly, the new definition must not change the resulting list of
> signatories and observers for existing contracts.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Importantly, the SCU assumes that the new definition does not alter the computation of the signatories, the observers, and the key for existing contracts. Otherwise, dynamic contract upgrades will fail at runtime.
```

For example, add a new field of “outside observers” to the v2 IOU
template, and add them to the observer definition.

.. code:: daml

  ...
      -- Add a new outsideObservers field
      outsideObservers: Optional [Party]
    where
      signatory issuer
      -- Add outsideObservers to the observer definition
      observer owner, fromOptional [] outsideObservers
  ...

The new observer definition allows v2 contracts and beyond to add
new observers via the outsideObservers field. However, any existing
contracts default to ``None`` for the ``outsideObservers`` field, so all
existing contracts have the same observer list as before: the
single owner.

In the case where a contract's signatories or observers change during an upgrade/downgrade,
the upgrade, and thus full transaction, fails at runtime.

Modifying Key Expressions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Similarly, key expressions can be changed as long as they evaluate to
> the same value for existing contracts, this means that the type of the key
> cannot change.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Similarly, key expressions can be changed as long as they evaluate to
the same value for existing contracts. In particular, this means that the type of the key
cannot change.
```

   dependency (or when running ``daml build --all``, unless explicitly
   listed in ``multi-package.yaml``)

-  Contract keys in upgradable packages can only include types defined
   within the same package, or in ``daml-stdlib`` or ``daml-prim``, for hashing reasons.
   This restriction is intended to be loosened in a later version.

> 

Author: @dylant-da @remyhaemmerle-da @paulbrauner-da let me know what you think.

All old contracts will default to using the ``issuer``, and new contracts
will use the ``alternativeKey`` field.
Note also that key expressions in upgrabable packages cannot include types
from other packages, with the exception of `daml-stdlib` and `daml-prim`.

> See `Limitations <#limitatiions>`__ for more information.

Author: @dylant-da @remyhaemmerle-da @paulbrauner-da let me know what you think.

Reviewer 10: LGTM
